# 11. Steam Traps
---

Function:
-	let out condensate, hold back steam
-	eliminate air and gas quickly
-	remove condensate, air and gas by responding promptly to changing conditions

Reason for use:
-	when used in the main steam line, prevent damage to the turbine
-	prevent corrosion in the system, due to the mixture of condensate and $CO_{2}$
-	improve heat exchange

Usually located in the main steam line.

Classes:
1.	mechanical - change of stage of fluid
2.	thermostatic - temperature
3.	thermodynamic - thermodynamic energy

## Inverted Bucket
A mechanical steam trap. Steam and condensate flows through the inlet into a bucket. When the bucket is floating, a valve to the outlet is closed. When the bucket is filled with enough condensate, it will sink, pulling the top valve from the seat. his allows the condensate to flow out of the outlet.

## Thermostatic
First type:

Second type (Bimetal):
Trap is normally open when two metal strips are relaxed. When steam heats the strips, they expand, closing the valve.

## Float and Thermostatic
A float inside the trap is attached to a valve at the bottom and is normally closed. As the trap fills with condensate, the float will rise allowing the valve to open and condensate to flow out.

## Thermodynamic
A disk at the top of the trap is normally pushed up by the flowing condensate and is normally open. If steam flows into the trap, it will flow above the disk and force the disk down, blocking the steam from flowing out.

## LAMBS Law
Load - the amount of condensate the trap must handle
Application - how the trap is used
Modulated or constant - the type of steam supply
Back pressure - the pressure (or range of pressures at the trap outlet
Supply pressure - the pressure (or range of pressures) at the trap inlet

## Armstrong IB Trap Features
An inverted bucket trap.
IB typically fails open -- when the IB is open, steam may leak out
If there is high pressure at the outlet, trap won't be as effective

## Armstrong Thermostatic Trap Features
-	weak to water hammer
-	subject to corrosion damage
-	subject to damage from freezing

## Armstrong Controlled Disk Features
A thermodynamic trap.
-	valve requires maximum differential pressure
-	violent snapping action of the disk can wear the seat, causing short service time

---

## Study Question Answers
1. 
