# 12. Boilers and Accessories
---

## Boilers

Waiau 3 & 4 -- Babcock & Wilcox three drum radiant type
	- produces 447,000 lb/hr of superheated steam at 875 psig and 905 F
	- 
Waiau 5 & 6 -- Babcock & Wilcox single drum radiant type
	- continually produces 485,000 lb/hr of superheated steam, but is capable of producing 506,000 lb/hr
	- 1315 psig
	- 950 F

Waiau 7 & 8 \ Kahe 1 & 2 -- Combusion Engineering (C-E) Natural Circulation Boiler

## Boiler Accessories

### Safety Valves
==Relieves pressure to prevent damage to the boiler by exceeding the maximum allowable working pressure by 6%.==

They open automatically when the internal pressure exceeds a set point. Once the pressure goes below the reset point, it closes back up. These two points are determined by adjusting the tension on the internal spring.

If the safety valve fails, it may not reset. If enough pressure is lost the unit will trip.

__blowdown__ -- the difference between the pressure needed to open a safety valve and the pressure at which the valve snaps shut.

Two types:
- DIN (German-based, used in Europe)
- ASME (used in US)

#### Electromatic Relief Valve (ERV)
Located upstream from relief valve. It is usually set to relieve before the other regular safety valves in order to minimize maintenence of them. Operators either off, automatically or manually.

#### Gagged Safety Valves
A device installed on a leaking or weeping safety valve in order to gag it. 

Installing the gag incorrectly can result in damage to the safety valve. Starting up the boiler with a gagged safety valve as it will expand the valve due to rising temperatures and will result in damage to the safety valve. If the safety valve is damaged the boiler can trip.

### Steam Drum and Internals
-> feedwater
main steam ->
downcomers ->

A vessel containing both steam and feedwater, where the steam and water separate, sending steam to the turbines and feedwater to the boiler.

__cyclone steam separator__ - spins the steam so all the moisture collects on the outside of the scrubber
__scrubber__ - series of metal sheets where steam can easily pass through but water cannot


Before steam is released from the steam drum to the turbines, all the moisture is removed from it in three stages:
1. primary separation -- cyclone steam separator
2. secondary separation -- scrubber
3. dryer -- screen dryer (a filter)

### Mud Drum / Lower Drum

### Soot Blowers
Remotes soot and ash from boiler tubes.

- Chilling action + velocity -- ash/soot will be removed by a cracking effect

#### ==Alarms==
- High boiler pressure
- Low blowing header pressure
- Control air failure

[[10. Boiler Fundamentals#Insertable Kinetic IK]]

### Boiler Water Treatment and Control

### Boiler Gauge Glasses
Allows visual observation of the water level in a boiler drum.

Direct Reading Gauge Glasses:
-	Tubular Glass (up to 250 psig)
-	Prismatic (up to 350 psig)
-	Flag Glass (up to 2000 psig)
-	Bicolor (up to 3000 psig)

### Drum Vent and Superheat Drains

### Boiler Fill and Drain System

### Air Preheaters (APH)
Two types:
1. Tubular
2. Rotating Bundle (Ljungstrom) (used here)

-	horizontal or vertical (direction of air flow)
-	stationary
-	heat transfer occurs from the flue gas (more heat recovered)
-	baskets containing corrugated sheet metal absorb the flue gas

### Steam Air Heaters

### Boiler Draft Equipment

==Alarms of FD and ID fans==:
-	bearing temperatures
-	motor winding temperature
-	motor overcurrent
-	low fan speed
-	undervoltage (low voltage)

#### Forced Draft (FD) Fans
Supplies the total volume of air required for combustion at a discharge pressure strong enough to overcome flow resistance in the ducts, steam air heaters, air preheaters, winbox, and flue gasses that pass to the stack.

Systems with only a FD fan ==operate at positive pressure==.

#### Induced Draft (ID) Fans
Creates a pressure differential to cause the required quantity of flue gas at full load to pass through the resistances from the furnace to the fan and discharge to the stack at about atmospheric pressure.

#### Balanced Draft System
A system consisting of a FD and ID fan. These systems ==operate at slightly negative pressure==.

- Recirculation Fans
- Stack
	-	redirects the flue gas up
	-	usually tall enough so that particles have time to drop-off
- Wet Stack
	-	discharges steam that is vent

### Boilers Sealing and Cooling Air
Cooling air is used to drop the temperature of a piece of equipment (those that cannot withstand high temperatures). Sealing air is used to prevent hot flue gasses from leaving the furnace
Cooling and sealing air may come from the same source.

-	Cooling air is used in:
	-	soot blower
	-	boiler inspection ports
	-	boiler penthouse
	-	recirculation fans
	
- used in pressurized boilers
- keeps flue gas within furnace


#### Aspirating Air
- at furnace doors - cools door opening, prevents gases from escaping
- door interlock - must open air before door

### Hydrostatic Testing (Hydro)
A hydrostatic test (hydro) is a test done by filling the water and steam side of the boiler with distilled water that is no more or less than 100F of the boiler metal temperature. The boiler must be completely filled with water and all air expelled before pressure is applied to the system.

- water is used because it is incompressible unlike air
- done before a routine overhaul and after repair tube leak
- determine if any leak on water or steam side

__bottle up__ -- sealing the boiler (by closing all the valves) to prevent any water/steam from leaving

### Superheater Drains
==Serves two (2) purposes==:
-	provide a means of flow through a superheater bank when starting up a boiler
-	provide a means of removing water or moisture from the superheater during a boiler start-up.


## Study Question Answers
1. a protective device designed to relieve the boiler steam pressure to prevent exceeding the maximum allowed working pressure by 6%
2. Cannot be 3% more than the maximum allowed working pressure (p9)
3. true
4. d
5. true
6. prevent (p11)
7. true
8. true
9. primary separation; secondary separation; dryer
10. gradual temperature changes
11. true
12. false
13. at least once a day (once a shift)
14. false
15. boiler header pressure; 
16. minimize corrosion; minimize scale; minimize carry-over
17. to minimize corrosion
18. in pH
19. feedwater
20.	blown down
21.	to visually indicate the level
22.	prevent any air coming out during startup; prevent a vacuum when shutting down
23.	provides a means of removing moisture from the superheater; vent
24.	true
25.	to not trap air
26.	preheat the air using the leftover heat from the flue gasses
27. preheats the air going into the air preheater to prevent corrosion from cold air carrying moisture
28. false
29. provide time for particles to drop-out;
30. motor overcurrent; undervoltage; varying temperature; motor overtemperature
31. to keep 
32. boiler observation points; penthouse; sootblower; 
33. true
34. true
35. true