# 13. Steam Turbines
---

Process of how steam drives the turbine (enthalpy -> kinetic energy):
1.	The nozzle converts the pressure energy of the steam to velocity
2.	The turbine blades exert a force on the steam to change its momentum by changing its velocity
3.	The steam in turn exerts an equal but opposite force on the blades causing them to move and turn the turbine shaft

Four fundamental parts:
-	rotor
-	casings
-	nozzles
-	frame

Two types:
-	reaction type
-	impulse type

## Reaction Type Turbine Blades
-	Nozzle is mounted on the wheel. Steam discharging from the nozzle will cause the wheel to rotate in the opposite direction.
-	Used at Waiau 3 & 4, 5 & 6, 8 & 7 and Kahe 1 & 2, 5 & 6

Ex. A lawn sprinkler

## Impulse Type Turbine Blades
-	Nozzle is stationary, and discharges against a blade or "bucket" that is mounted on the wheel. Steam discharging from the nozzle will cause the wheel to rotate in that direction.
-	Used at Kahe 3 & 4

Ex. Blowing onto a pinwheel

## Turbine Construction

==**Compound turbine**== -- a machine in which steam passes in sequence through two or more separate turbine sections

**Tandem compound** -- an arrangement of turbine sections in line on the same shaft and driving the same generator
**Cross compound** -- an arrangement of turbine sections on separate shafts and driving separate generators

**Reheat turbines** -- a machine in which intermediate pressure steam is routed back to the boiler for re-heating, then returned to the intermediate and low pressure turbine sections

## Turbine Staging
Each row of turbine blades is called a **stage**.
-	First stage (**Impulse stage**) is located in HP section
-	Last stage is located in LP section

HP and IP rotors are **single flow**.
LP rotor is **double flow**.

## Seals and Glands
Seals are placed around the perimeter of each blade to prevent steam from leaking around the outside of the blade.

## Throttle Valve
Used to control steam flow to the turbine during start-up periods. The turbine valves are hydraulically opened and spring closed.

## Emergency Stop Valve

## Lift Bar Governing Valves
Used to control steam flow in response to changing loads. This governing valve is controlled by a bar-lift mechanism.

### Lever Lift Governing Valves
Another application of the bar-lift mechanism is an external hinged lever lift.

### Camshaft Operated Governing Valves
Used by various General Electric turbines.

### Individually Operated Governing Valves

### Westinghouse Systems
-	In reheat units -> Reheat Stop Valve & Intercept Valve
-	Throttle Valve & Governer Valve

### General Electric
-	In reheat units -> Intercept Valve & Reheat Stop Valve
-	Main Stop Valve & Control Valve

## Steam Flow through Governor Valves
-	A sequence of valves is used to make the steam flow to energy output relationship to be as linear as possible.
-	In reality, the sequence of valves can desync causing "bumps" if a valve is opened early or "flat spots" if a valve is opened late.

## Turbine Bearing Basics

Jobs of the bearing:
-	Support the load (weight of the rotor)
-	Stabilize rotor shaft; dampen vibration... through entire operating range of the turbine

Dampening -> Oil and Oil Wedge

How Oil Wedge can be compromised:
-	Oil Supply / Oil Issues
-	Rough Surface ("record player grooves" in bearing or journal)
-	Uneven wear (bearing or journal)
-	Twisted bearing
-	Tilted bearing

If Oil Wedge is compromised:
-	Instability (vibration)
	-	Vibration Sensitivity to MW load
	-	Vibration when passing through the Rotor Critical Speed on unit coastdown
-	Bearing damage (babbitt wiping)

### Thrust Bearing
Thrust can occur if most of the steam in a turbine is moving in one direction.
In a reheat unit, the HP thrust cancels the IP thrust. The LP double flow cancels each other.
In a non-reheat unit, the HP thrusts in one direction, so a dummy (balance) piston is added to reduce the thrust.

### Lubricating Oil
Lubricating oil is needed to minimize the friction in the main bearings, thrust bearings, and reduction gears (if used). The bearings and journals pick up heat due to friction and by the shaft conducting heat from the hot parts of the turbine. Lube oil carries the heat away and keeps bearing emperatures at a safe operating level.

### Turbine Controls
Different units use different turbine control systems:
Waiau units have Mechanical-Hydraulic Controls (MHC)
Kahe units vary:
-	1 & 2 are MHC
-	3 & 4 are GE Analog Electro-Hydraulic Controls (EHC) with upgraded ABB digital controls
-	5 & 6 are Westinghouse Digital Electro-Hydraulic Controls (DEH)

### Turbine Operation
We must manage:
-	Thermal Stresses in the steam turbine
-	Differential Expansions in the steam turbine
This is done using a Steam Turbine Starting and Loading Instructions (SALI)

### Rotor Critical Speed
-	At 1st critical, radial rubbing is more likely at the rotor mid-span
-	At 2nd critical, radial rubbing is more likely away from the rotor mid-span

### Total Stress
A combination of stresses from multiple stress inducers.

#### Stress Cycle
-	The application of stress followed by its removal
-	Starting a unit and shutting it down is a stress cycle
-	Changing the load on a unit upwards then back downwards is a stress cycle

When this is done many times it is referred to as **Cyclic Stress**.



### Journal Bearing
A cylinder (the bearing) which sounds the shaft (the journal) and is filled with a lubricant (lube oil); the lubricant supports the shaft, preventing metal-to-metal contact.

Without lubricant, the turbine would contact the bearing and eventually come to a stop.

-	Size -> small to really big
-	No moving parts
-	Bearing slides -> friction -> lower RPM applications (3600 RPM considered low)
-	Very high load carrying capability -- used for heavy rotating elements
-	Less sensitive to dirt

Drain holes located on bottom half of bearing.

Types of Journal Bearings:
-	Cylindrical
-	Elliptical
-	Tilt Pad (Single Tilt; Double Tilt)
-	Shortened Elliptical

### Ball Bearing

-	Size -> generally small
-	Has moving parts
-	Bearing rolls -> frictionless -> very high RPM applications
-	Lower load carrying capability -- used for lighter rotating elements
-	Very sensitive to dirt

Four Fundamental parts of a Steam Turbine:
-	rotor (inside casings)
-	casings
-	nozzles (inside casings) - steam passes through these to hit the rotors
	-	enters at around 1800 pounds of pressure
-	frame or base

---


1.	rotor, casings, nozzles, and frame
2.	-
3.	-
4.	-
5.	-
6.	-
7.	-
8.	-
9.	throttle / stop valve
10.	-
11.	-
12.	true
13.	-
14.	-
15.	-
16.	minimize friction in main bearings and thrust bearings; keeps bearing temperatures at safe operating level