# 14. Generators
---

```toc
```

## Generator Basics
Function:
-	Produce a voltage or potential difference which causes current to flow

Basic Laws:
-	Electric current passing through a coil produces a magnetic field
-	Voltage is induced in a coil if a moving magnetic field passes through it
-	Either the magnet or the coil is moving, the other is stationary
	-	In HECO generators, the coil is stationary and the magnet is moving

__generator__ -- technically a term used for a device that produces DC current
__alternator__ -- a device that produces AC current (what we actually have)

==Major Components:==
-	Stator
-	Rotor
-	Exciter

## Stator
Electrical Circuit
-	Stationary windings in stator core
-	Voltage induced when rotor is spinning
-	Current flows through windings when connected to load

Core:
-	Iron core comprised of thousands of thin pie shaped segments (laminations)
-	Slots to support winding

Winding:
-	Conductors insulated together in bars
-	Connected to form 3 phases
-	Secured in slots with wedges
-	11,000 VAC (W3/4) to 16,000 VAC (K5/6) operating voltage

## Rotor
Magnetic Circuit
-	Field intensity varied by DC current input (Exciter)
-	Motion by prime mover (Turbine)

-	Located in the hollow cylinder of the stator
-	==Basic requirement== -> to produce a strong magnetic field

Forging:
-	Iron forging with machined slots for winding

Winding:
-	Multiple coils wound in slots connected in series to form a single, continuous coil
-	Secured in slots with wedges
-	250-375 VDC

Retaining ring:
-	Brace coil ends from centrifugal force
-	Most stressed component during operation

## Exciter / Voltage Regulator
Voltage produced in stator conductors depends on
-	Length of conductor (FIXED)
-	Speed of rotation (FIXED)
-	Stength of the rotating magnetic field (CONTROLLABLE)

Function:
-	Provides and controls DC field current

Types:
-	Brushed: Kahe 1-4, Waiau 3-10
-	Brushless: CIP, Kahe 5 & 6

Modes:
-	Automatic: Regulates generator terminal voltage
-	Manual: Regulates field voltage or current

## Watts, VARS, Power Factor
-	Real power (Watts) does work
-	Reactive power (VARS) circulating power, no work produced
-	Apparent power (VA) combined Real and Reactive power

Power Factor:
$$
\frac{\text{Real Power}}{\text{Apparent Power}}

$$

## Hydrogen Cooling & Sealing
-	Major limit to generator capability is the ability to cool the copper

### Hydrogen Gas
Functions:
-	==Provide a means for safely putting hydrogen in or taking it out of the machine==, using carbon dioxide as a scavenging medium
-	==Maintain gas pressure in the machine at the desired value==
-	==Indicate to the operator at all times, the condition of the machine in regard to gas pressure, temperature, purity, and the prescence of water==. The prescence of water in the machine is also indicated by an alarm on the gas control panel.
	-	gas pressure = 30 psi
	-	temperature = 46 C
	-	purity = 90%+
-	==Dry the gas and remove any water vapor== which may get into the machine from the seal oil.

Advantages of using hydrogen gas:
1.	==Reduced windage and ventilating losses== because of the low density of the hydrogen gas
2.	==Increased output per unit volume of active material== because of the high thermal conductivity and heat transfer coefficients of hydrogen. This advantage of hydrogen cooling makes it possible to build turbine generators for higher ratings than are possible with air cooling
3.	==Reduced maintenence expense because of the freedom from dirt and moisture== (closed system)
4.	==Increased life of the insulation of the stator winding because of the absense of oxygen and moisture== (high purity)
5.	==Reduced windage noise because of the low density of the gas==
	
Disadvantages:
-	Highly explosive
	
### Seal Oil System
Functions:
-	==Provide oil under pressure to the seals as free as possible from air and moisture==
-	Minimizes the need to exhaust & replenish the hydrogen gas
-	Helps remove a large part of the absorbed gas and moisture from the oil before it is pumped back to the seals
-	Prevent escape of gas along the shaft where rotor ends are brought out of the gas tight enclosure

Main components:
1.	Defoaming tanks
2.	Vacuum tank
3.	Oil pumps
4.	Vacuum pump and Separator tank
5.	Generator bearing drain loop seal

Hydrogen gas may cycle through the system ==30 or more times per minute==.

## Generator Care
-	Provide a clean, dry, cool, safe environment
	-	Maintain purity/pressure
	-	Hydrogen coolers in service
	-	Hydrogen dryers in service
-	Automatic voltage regulation is your friend
	-	Set and forget
-	Report abnormal conditions
	-	Unusual noise, vibration, odors, etc.
	-	Excessive hydrogen usage

---

## Study Question Answers
1.	produce a voltage or potential difference which causes current to flow
2.	voltage; potential difference
3.	stator; rotor; exciter; coolers
4.	all of these
5.	to produce a strong magnetic field
6.	-
	1.	reduced windage and ventilating losses
	2.	increased output per unit volume of active material
	3.	reduced maintenence expense
	4.	increased life of the insulation of the stator winding
	5.	reduced windage noise
7.	hydrogen gas moves through the generator in a gas-tight ventilating system. it goes through the rotor to pick up heat, exits through vent holes in the rotor, through tube coolers where heat is transferred to auxillary cooling water, then through rotor fans to repeat the cycle.
8.	false
9.	-
	1.	provide a means of adding or taking out hydrogen from the system
	2.	maintain desired gas pressure in the system
	3.	indicate to the operator at all times the condition of the machine including gas pressure, temperature, purity, and the presence of water
	4.	dry the gas and remove any water vapor
10.	to prevent the escape of gas along the shaft where rotor ends are brought out of the gas tight enclosure
11.	-
	1.	Defoaming tanks
	2.	Vacuum tank
	3.	Oil pumps
	4.	Vacuum pump and Separator tank
	5.	Generator bearing drain loop seal
	
> 12. As the steam passes through a turbine, the pressure drops and the steam expands. (True/False)

True

> 13. The turbine steam stop valves and hydraulically closed and spring opened.  (True/False)

False

> 14. Valves, located in a steam chest, that control the changes in steam flow to meet changing loads are referred to as ____.
a.	admission valves
b.	governing valves
c.	control valves
d.	all of these
15. Turbine lubrication is needed to minimize the friction in the main bearings, the turbine blades, and the reduction gears. True \ False
< 16. Discuss briefly the function of lubricating oil in turbines. 17. The turbine control system performs several principal functions, they are __ _ a. to regulate the flow of steam to the turbine and protect the turbine from operations which might damage it. b. to regulate the flow of steam to the turbine and the speed of the turbine blades. c. to regulate the speed of the turbine blades and protect the turbine from operations which might damage it.

	
	