# 16. Boiler Fuel System
---

Crude Oil -> Refinery -> Crude Unit -> Residual
Crude Unit -> Cracker Unit -> Cutter
Residual + Cutter -> Low Sulfur Fuel Oil (LSFO)

## Typical Fuel Tank

## Heating
Fuel Oil Tanks use auxillary steam to preheat fuel oil.

Fuel Oil Heaters use steam from the Reboiler to heat fuel oil.

## Reboiler Condensate Tank
Collects condensate by using steam to heat fuel oil. This is separate from the main condensate tank (to prevent contamination).

## Waiau LSFO & Diesel Tanks
Diesel Tanks 1 & 2
LSFO Tank 1, 3, 4, 5 (2 is OOS)

## Fuel Oil Heaters

==When placing in service:==
-	steam should not be on unless some oil is flowing through the heater
-	heater drips are router into the system

### Suction (Primary) Fuel Oil (F/O) Heaters & Pumps
Lowers the oil viscosity for ease of transfer from tank to tank or tank to plant. This is achieved with line heating (tracing) which lowers the viscosity of oil in the lines.

### Secondary Fuel Oil (F/O) Heaters & Pumps
Raises temperature and pressure of fuel oil to prepare for [[Glossary#Atomization|atomization]].

A target viscosity and burning point is then achieved for proper atomization

## Hot Water System
Heats oil in tanks. 

## Steam Tracing System
Heats oil in lines.

## Viscosity
[[Measurements#Viscosity]]

Temperature of fuel oil rises as viscosity drops.

## Typical Burner Assembly
Components:
-	Inner Casing
-	Air foils
-	Diffuser Plate
-	Air Doors
-	Outer Casing
-	Air Door Handle
-	Atomizer Assembly
-	Yoke
-	Safety Shutoff Device Handle

## Burner Front
Atomizing steam and Fuel oil supplied on two lines

## Fuel Firing System
Fuel is fired from four corners of the furnace, at slight angles to induce a swirling motion in the flames.

## Basic Problems
| Problem                                | Probable Causes(s)                                                                                        | Corrected By                                                                                                                                     |
| -------------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Flame separation from burner tip       | <ul><li>oil too hot</li><li>diffuser too close to the tip</li><li>air flow too high</li></ul>                                         | Reduce oil temperature or reduce air flow                                                                                                        |
| Flame burning toward burner throat     | <ul><li>air flow too low</li><li>register throttled too much</li></ul>                                                             | Increase air flow, readjust registers                                                                                                            |
| Smoking Flame                          | <ul><li>cold oil</li><li>poor atomization</li><li>dirty burner</li><li>insufficient air</li></ul>                                             | Increase oil temperature, clean burner, increase air flow                                                                                        |
| Formation of clinkers (carbon buildup) | Dirty burner, loose tip, burner retraction out of adjustment, cold oil, or incorrect air register setting | Clean burner, check tip for tightness and tighten as needed, readjust retraction, increase oil temperature, or check and adjust register setting |
| Fire flies or sparklers                | Oil too hot or too much air                                                                               | Reduce oil temperature or reduce air flow                                                                                                        |

## Igniter Fuel
-	Diesel & Propane

## Emergency Shutoff
Fuel Oil Emergency Solenoid Operated Valve
-	supply line before unit
-	shutoff all fuel to unit in case of emergency
Fuel Oil Supply Trip Solenoid Valve
-	secondary FO pump discharge
-	stop flow of oil to burner front in case of boiler or unit trip
Spill over valve
-	relieves FO pressure to burner front in case of boiler trip or unit trip

---
## Study Question Answers

1.	-
	-	insulation
	-	steam coils
	-	reboiler
2.	true
3.	burner throat;
4.	dispensing fuel oil as a mist
5.	-
6.	false
7.	a sample is tested in a lab, and SSU is determined from a table
8.	burn point
9.	-
10.	heat exhangers
11.	lowers viscosity and achieves proper burning point
12. -
	-	steam supply temperature
13.	both of the above
14.	

> 1. Discuss way fuel oil temperatures are maintained in fuel oil service tanks.

-	reboiler
-	hot water system
-	steam coils within tank (uses steam or hot water)

> 2. The increase or decrease in the flow and pressure of oil supplied to the burner guns is determined by boiler combustion requirements. (Circle one) True / False

True

> 3. What is the location and function of the Whirling Chamber?

Burner throat

> 4. What is meant by "atomizing"?

Dispensing fuel oil as a mist in order to increase surface area and conductivity.

> 5. Following are five (5) basic problems encountered with fuel oil burners. Give the probable cause of each problem and the correction:

> A. Flame separation from burner tip

-	oil too hot
-	diffuser too close to the tip
-	air flow too high

> B. Flame burning toward burner throat

-	

> C. Smoking flame

> D. Formation of clinkers (carbon buildup):

> E. Fire flies or sparklers:

> 6. Before moving the handle to manually start the igniter, the air, current and gas should be on. (Circle one) True / False

> 7. How is the SSU viscosity determined?

> 8. What factor causes the viscosity of fue oil to change?

> 9. The lowest temperature at which an oil will just flow is indicated by the ____.

> 10. Lowering the viscosity of fuel oil for ease of handling and proper atomization is performed by various ______ located at strategic points in the cycle.

> 11. What happens to fuel oil temperature in the secondary heat exchangers as opposed to the fuel oil tank's steam coil?
> 12. Oil temperature can be accomplished in two ways. These are:
> 13. When placing a fuel oil heater in service, the following operation should be observed. (Circle one)
> A. Steam should not be on unless some oil is flowing through the heater.
> B. Heater drips are routed into the system.
> C. Both of the above.