# 17. Make-up Water System
---

Objectives:
1.	Discuss the supply or source of water for water purification systems
2.	Describe the pretreatment of water in water purification systems
3.	Discuss the methods used to produce high purity water
4.	Describe how purified water is stored and transferred

---

High purity water is essential to (1) ==prevent corrosion== and (2) ==control scale== to ensure continued operation of a steam plant.

[[4. Power Plant Chemistry#Chemical Properties|Chemical Properties of Water]]
## Water Chemistry
Reasons why water is an ideal material for steam driven generators:
1.	==Water is a very effective heat transfer medium== because it is capable of absorbing and releasing great quantities of heat
	-	It takes 1 BTU to raise the temperature of a pound of water 1 F. If condensate starts at 100 F, it takes 1082 BTU to raise a pound of water to 1182 F, steam temperature.
2.	==Steam has the ability to store up the great amount of heat energy== absorbed by the water, and is able to release this energy at the turbine, thus converting it to useful mechanical energy
3.	==Steam can be recycled as feedwater to reuse in the steam generating cycle.== After performing its useful work at the turbine, the steam can be condensed and recovered as feedwater to be used over again in the steam generating cycle
4. ==Water is abundant and cheap.== Water is an abundant natural resource, and from an economic standpoint, it is cheap because of its avalability

## Supply / Source
**raw water** -- the water used to make demineralized water (the supply)
Raw water is pumped directly to the demineralizers.

Sources for raw water:
-	wells (sea water)
	-	pH = 7.5
	-	conductivity = 10,000 umhos
-	domestic (city) water
	-	pH = 7.5
	-	conductivity = 350 umhos
-	raw water
	-	pH = 7.5
	-	conductivity = 700 umhos
-	recycled water (processed city water)

## Purifying Water
Need for pure water:
-	Prevents corrosion of the steam piping and turbine blades
-	Maintains consistent heating and flow in the boiler

-	HECO's design of the boiler, steam piping, turbines
	-	all metallic surfaces
	-	boilers are carbon steel
		-	when boiling water, consistent heating and flow are preffered
		-	ions will interrupt the desired heating and flow
	-	steam piping / turbine blades varies (stainless, chrome-moly)
		-	ions will corrode these surfaces, interrupt steam flow

Methods of removing dissolved solids:
1.	Reverse Osmosis (RO) -- used at Waiau
2.	Demineralizer -- used at Kahe

## Pretreatment
Starts the purification process (removal of suspended solids).

Two methods:
-	**Filtration**
	-	Multi Media Filters (MMF) / Sand Filters
		-	sand filter that removes suspended particles with sizes greater than 10 microns
	-	Poly Styrene Filters
		-	normally used to remove suspended solids with sizes greater than 5 microns
-	**Reverse Osmosis (RO)**
	-	Some RO systems use anti-scaling or pH control to prepare the water entering the RO membranes (chemical injection)
	
### Multi Media Filters
Used to remove suspended solids from raw water (reduces turbidity of water)

-	3 MMFs
-	Solids entrained within filtration media
	-	filtration media with varying densities
	-	stratify into different layers
-	Backwash to clean

## Dimineralizer Systems

Waiau:
-	Raw water used as feed water to demineralizer system
	-	ground or well water (Artesian wells)
	-	city water
raw water -> pumps -> reverse osmosis -> EDI -> mixed bed demineralizer

Kahe:
-	RO water used as feed water
-	Ion exchange takes place to purify water
raw water -> pumps -> reverse osmosis -> cation vessel -> degassifier -> anion vessel -> mixed bed demineralizer

### Reverse Osmosis (RO)
Used to remove dissolved solids such as salts or ions.

Reverse osmosis is a filtration process where pressure is applied to water containing dissolved solids, which forces (only pure) water through the membrane.

Advantages:
-	Simple to operate
-	Energy efficient
	
Components:
-	Forwarding pumps
	-	increases pressure of water to inlet
-	Array of RO membranes
	-	2 banks
	-	Uses semi-permeable membranes
	-	Two (double) pass RO system
	-	High pressure pumps
-	Polishing unit
	-	Electrodeionization (EDI) unit
	-	Mixed Bed Resin
	
Resin: material added to a solution for the purpose of causing a reaction

### Electrodeionization (EDI) Unit:
Used to remove traces of dissolved solids.

EDI is an **electrical process** which uses an electric field to attract ions to positive/negative electrodes in water.

-	Water directed through multiple channels
	-	ion exchange resin
	-	voltage applied
-	5 EDI modules

### Demineralizer
Used to remove impurities in the water.

Demineralization is a **chemical process** that removes impurities in water using ion exchange. This involves adding **resins** into the water that induce a reaction with the ions in order to remove or exchange the ions the water contains.

Components:
-	Cation Vessel
	-	vessel where cations are exchanged ($Fe^{3+}, Ca^{2+}, Mg^{2+}, Na^{+}$)
-	Degassifier
	-	removes gases, mainly carbon dioxide ($CO_{2}$)
-	Anion Vessel
	-	vessel where anions are exhanged (pottasium, sulfur, chlorine, carbonate)
-	Mixed Bed Vessel 

Synthetic resins can be damaged if:
-	Exposed to high temperatures (> 140 F)
-	Exposed to organics (e.g. oil)

#### RO Water
-	Reclaimed water
-	Minerals removed, bacteria and other organic material may still be in water
-	For use as irrigation, industrial use
-	Not potable

---

How much demineralized water do we use?
-	Unit data book
What is the minimum inventory that each generating station must store?
-	Inventory of water
Where can you find this information?
-	Unit data book
What happens if the demineralize breaks down? Where would we get our make-up water?
-	Can get it delivered from another station

---

## Study Question Answers
1.	prevent corrosion and scale control
2.	abundant; recyclable; effective heat transfer medium
3.	raw water
4.	-
	1.	city water
	2.	recycled water
5.	-
6.	reduces turbidity of water (removes suspended solids)
7.	false (is a physical exchange)
8.	calcium; sodium; sulfur
9.	true
10.	false
11.	dissolved solids
12.	pressure forces water through a membrane to separate the dissolved solids

>1. Why is high purity water essential in the operation of a steam plant?
>2. Why is water the ideal material for use in our steam driven generators? 
>3. The water that is used to make purified water is usually known as 
>4. Some sources of this water are: List two (2).
>5. Why do we pre-treat the water used to make purified water?
>6. What is the function of the Multi-Media Filter?

>7. The process of filtration is the removal by chemical exchange of almost all the dissolved solids in the water. (Circle one) True \ False

False (it is a physical exchange)

>8. List two (2) compounds that form scale on metal surfaces.

- magnesium
- sodium (salt)
- silica
- calcium
- iron

>9. Drinking water is not pure enough for critical industrial uses. (Circle one) True \ False

True

>10. The cation exchanger and the anion exchanger are part of the Electrodialysis Reversal (EDR) process. (Circle one) True \ False

False

>11. Electrodialysis removes _____ from the water.

>12. Describe the process of reverse osmosis.

RO is a filtration system that uses a semi-permeable membrane where pure water can pass through but dissolved solids cannot. Pressure is used to force water through the membrane.