# 18. Condensate and Feedwater
---

```toc
```

- steam enters condenser
- passes through a series a tubes with cooler water passing through it
- condensed water (condensate) is sent to condensate pump

## Condensate System
Purpose:
-	Provides condensate to the Boiler Feed Pump (BFP)
	-	at increased pressure; sufficient net positive suction head
-	Improve unit effeciency
	-	use low pressure feedwater heaters to increase temperature
-	Provide cooling water
	-	to use in the gland steam condenser and air ejector condensor
-	Provide make-up water to various systems
-	Control hotwell level 
	
As condensate passes through the condensor & feedwater system, its temperature and pressure gradually increase.

Components:
- main condensor
- hotwell
- condensate pumps
- gland steam condensers
- air ejector condensors
- de-aerator
- hot surge tank
- boiler feed pumps
	- increase the pressure of feedwater until it can pass through the high pressure feedwater heaters
	- variable speed and used for flow control
- high-pressure heater
- feedwater regulating valve

### Alarms & Switches
-	Hotwell high and low
-	Hotwell and condensate pump
	-	high conductivity
-	Condensate pH high and low level alarms
-	Condensate header & pump discharge low pressure
	-	APS

### Condenser
A 2-pass [[Shell and Tube Heater]].

### Hotwell
Collects condensate from the main condensor. It provides a supply of water for the condensate pump to pull from.

Level is measured using sight glasses. It is critical to control and maintain the correct level in the hotwell.

### Condensate Pumps
Used to increase the pressure of the condensate from the hotwell. They are usually constant-speed, multistage, centrifugal pumps.

Usually two or more condensate pumps are used in a condensate & feedwater system, and one or more pumps may be operating at any given time. E.g. if the pumps are 100% capacity pumps, only one needs to be running while the others serve as backups.

### Air Ejector Condensers
Used to remove non-condensible gases from the condensor and recovers heat from the ejected air. In the shell side, it takes auxillary steam (air-vapor) from the main condensor and discharges it into the atmosphere. It is cooled using condensate in the tube side.

### Gland Steam Condensers
Used to recover heat from the steam used in the plant's gland steam system. Uses condensate in order to cool the steam and heat the condensate.

These condensors are usually "shell and tube" heat exchangers. [[Shell and Tube Heater]]

The tube side contains condensate that cools the steam, and the shell side contains steam from the gland steam system or the air ejector system.

### Feedwater Heaters (FWH)
Used to heat up feedwater that is being sent to the Boiler Feed Pump.

A [[Shell and Tube Heater]] where feedwater enters the tube side through the feedwater inlet and the inlet water box and flows to through the tubes to the outlet water box. Extraction steam flows through the shell side to heat the feedwater.

The discharge FWHs is also connected "recirculation" line (usually closed) to the hotwell. This is used during startup.

Some heaters may contain a desuperheating section (occurs before the condenser section) where the steam is cooled to a saturation temperature.

#### Low-pressure Feedwater Heaters (FWH)
The extraction steam used in a low-pressure FWH is taken from the LP section of the turbine.

They are usually placed after the condensate pump and before the boiler feed pump.

#### High-pressure Feedwater Heaters (FWH)
The extraction steam used in a high-pressued FWH is taken from the HP and IP sections of the turbine.

They are usually placed after the boiler feed pump and before the steam drum of the boiler.

#### Cascading Drain System
[[8. Heat Exchangers#Cascading Drain System]]

### De-aerator
Used to remove dissolved gases from the condensate to minimize corrosion in downstream equipment, while also heating up the condensate.

An open or direct contact heater where oxygen and other non-condensable gases are removed from the condensate in order to minimize corrosion in downstream equipment.

This is a direct contact heater because the de-aerator mixes the condensate and extraction steam together, heating the condensate.

### Hot Surge Tank (or Feedwater Storage Tank or De-aerator Storage Tank)
Where condensate is collected after leaving the bottom of the de-aerator. At this point, the condensate can be considered "feedwater".

This tank provides a net positive suction head for the pumps that are connected to it.

## Boiler Feedwater System
Purpose:
-	raise feedwater pressure
-	maintain steam drum level during load changes
-	improve unit efficiency
-	provide pure water for attemperation
	-	reheat
	-	superheat

### Alarms & Switches
-	BFP suction low pressure
-	BFP motor & pump high temperature
-	BFP low flow switches
	-	opens BFP recirc valves
-	BFW header low pressure
-	BFP standby start APS
-	BFW high conductivity
-	BFW high/low pH

### Feedwater Regulating Valve
Regulates the flow of feedwater entering the economizer. Flow can also be regulated by controlling the speed of the boiler feed pumps.

### Economizer
Used to preheat the feedwater using the combustion gases leaving the boiler.

### Boiler Feed Pumps
Used to increase the pressure of the feedwater. They are variable-speed, multistage centrifugal pumps. Some pumps are driven by steam turbines. The speed of the turbine depends on the amount of steam flowing to the turbine. 

Pressure can be as high as 3200 psig.



#### Booster Pumps
Used to increase the pressure to the suction of the boiler feed pumps. They are usually constant-speed, multistage centrifugal pumps, driven be constant speed motors. Not generally used for flow control.

Can be located on the condensor side of the system ("condensate booster pumps") or on the feedwater side ("boiler feed booster pumps").

Not all systems use booster pumps.

## Additional Systems

### Chemical Addition System
May be connected to the condenser system, the feedwater system, or both. Used to add chemicals to the water such as hydrazine to prevent corrosion and ammonia to control pH.

### Makeup Water System
Connected to the hotwell. Adds pure water to the condensate system to compensate for water losses that may occur due to condensate sampling or to steam or water leaks in the system. Makeup water is stored in a condensate storage tank. Most contain purifying equipment such as evaporator and demineralizers.

## Water Treatment
Chemicals:
-	Ammonia Hydroxide
	-	maintains basic pH
-	Hydrazine
	-	$O_{2}$ scavenger

## Normal Operation

### Lubricating Oil
Can be viewed through a sight glass to check the flow, level, and condition of the lubricant.

If the ==lubicating oil has an unusual color==, this is a sign that ==the oil has been contaminated and should be replaced==.

### Cooling Water
Used to cool the pump's bearings.


### Thermal Temperature Difference (TTD)
a measure of the effectiveness of heat transfer between the steam and feedwater in the feedwater heater

TTD = (saturation temperature of the steam in the heater's condensing section) - (feedwater outlet temperature)

As the TTD goes down, the efficiency goes up. TTD should be as small as possible

### Checks
Pump Checks:
-	pressures
-	temperatures
-	lubrication (through sight glass)

Bearings:
-	overheating (by touch or with pyrometer)
-	excessive viration (by touch or with vibration meter)
-	contaminated lubricant (abnormal color through sight glass)
-	low lubricant level
-	temperature of lubricant is within normal range (temp gauge)

Cooling water:
-	valves should be open

Seal water:
-	greater than normal flow

## Operating Problems

### Air Binding
Occurs when air or other gasses are trapped in the water boxes on the tube side of the heat, causing the flow of water through the tubes to be restricted (increases velocity of water).

This can happen in any closed heater, but is more common in low-pressure heaters.

-	Differential pressure across the feedwater heater could be a sign of air binding.

### Pump Problems
Common causes:
-	Pump trip caused by motor overload, low oil pressure, or breaker trip
-	Manual trip of pump
-	Loss of pump suction, insufficient net positive suction head, or loss of prime
-	Malfunctioning variable-speed coupling (for boiler feed pump)
-	Improper valve lineup

## Topic I: System Layout
Purpose of feedwater & condensate system:
-	to maintain normal operation of a power plant's boiler
-	to ensure the water entering the boiler is equal to the amount of steam leaving the boiler and enters the main steam system
-	to keep the boiler supplied with the proper amount of water

condensate side -- hotwell to the suction side of the boiler feed pump

---

## Study Question Answers
1.	increases pressure and temperature of condensate to provide to the BFP; provides cooling water to use in the gland steam condensor and air ejector condensor; provides make-up water for various systems; controls hotwell level
2. 
	-	removes dissolved gases from the condensate to minimize corrosion
	-	heats up condensate
3.	
	-	recovers heat from the steam
	-	provide low temperature for turbine exhaust
	-	reclaim condensate for reuse in cycle
	-	removes dissolved solids
4.	false
5.	false
6.	level controllers; non-return valves
7.	non-return
8.	true
9.	
	-	
10.	false
11.	transfer heat
12.	
	-	a back up extraction line exceeding the extraction line
13.	silica
14.	conductivity
15.	air ejector
16.	true
17.	100%
18.	false
19. -
	-	
