# Compressed Air System
Section 23

Function:
-	Deliver reliable supply ot clean, dry, compressed air at a stable pressure to every end user

Considerations:
-	Air Flow - supply must be adequate to meet demand
-	Air Pressure - equipment operating pressure requirements
-	Air Quality

## Sources of Pressure Drops
-	Plumbing: piping, hoses, fittings, valves
	-	Longer pipe length -> more pressure drop
	-	Smaller pipe diameter -> more pressure drop (1" difference = 4x pressure lost)
	-	Pipe diameter -> changes flow, speed, pressure
-	Equipment: filters, dryers, aftercoolers, moisture separators, regulators
-	Leaks

## Air Quality
-	clean, dry air
-	affected by the components of the compressed air system
-	application of the compressed air at points of use determins the quality of the air required

## Service Air System
-	provides moisture-free compressed air
-	for plant cleaning, operation of pneumatic tools, soot blowing, burner cleaning, etc.
-	header pressure -> 90-105 psig

## Instrument Air System
-	provides oil and moisture-free compressed air
-	for operation of combustion and feedwater control valves and all other pneumatic controls in station
-	header pressure -> 85-100 psig

## Alarms
-	Compresser Trip
-	Low Header Pressure
-	Standby/Start

## Major Components
-	Compressor Drive Motor
-	Cooling Fan and Motor
-	Aftercooler
-	Separator Tank
-	Rotary Gear Box

## Cooling
Can be air cooled or water cooled (using ACW).

---

>1. The two air systems are an ________ system and a ________ system.

instrument air; service air

>2. What are the basic functions of these two systems? 

instrument air is used for combustion and feedwater control valves

service air is used for plant cleaning, sootblowing, burner cleaning, for shop/lab use, as well as any pneumatic tools.

>3. An explosion could occur if an accumulation of oil vapor is not frequently drained from the ________ .

>4. With an air compressor, pressure is controlled by automatic ________ and ________ of the compressor. 

>5. Air compressors are started up ________
a. automatically
b. manually
c. both

>6. The compressor only supplies air and requires jacket cooling water when it is
a. unloaded
b. loaded

>7. List two causes of compressor overheating.

>8. List two causes of compressor motor overload.

>9. What is the purpose of the pressure reducing stations?

>10. Service Air is supplied at _______ psig.

90-105 psig

>11. Instrument Air is supplied at _______ psig, psig, and ----- psig

85-100 psig

>12. The absorbing agent in air dryers is called a desiccant. True \ False

>13. Describe how the Air Dryer dries the air stream. 

>14. Name the main components in a compressed air system.

