# 4. Power Plant Chemistry
#chemistry

---

__Physical Properties__ -> can be described without reference to any other substance, examples:
- color
- material
- appaerance

__Chemical Properties__ -> described with reference to other substances

ex. Coke + Mentos -> physical reaction
ex. Water + Dry Ice -> physical reaction
ex. Baking Soda + Vinegar -> chemical reaction

Categories of matter:
1. Elements
2. Mixtures
3. Compounds

__corrosion__ -> damage due to a chemical reaction
__erosion__ -> damage due to the flow of a substance ^eb9c95

## Ions
__anions__ -> negatively charged ion
__cations__ -> positively charged ion

## Chemistry of $H_2O$
Water ($H_2O$) is a compound of 2 hydrogen atoms and 1 oxygen atom
Salt ($NaCl$) dissolves in water -> solution

### Chemical Properties
-	Excellent solvent
	-	dissolves solids, liquids, and gases it contacts (calcium, chloride, carbon dioxide, sodium, etc.)
	-	when it dissolves in water, it separates as [[4. Power Plant Chemistry#Ions|ions]]
	
-	Pros of ions in water
	-	serves as nutrients to all living matter
	-	it is the electrolytes in our bodies
-	Cons of ions in water
	-	ions can corrode metal surfaces
	-	hardness (calcium, magnesium) forms and sticks to surfaces
	
### Acid or Alkali
More positive (ex. hydrogen ($H+$) compounds) -> acidic solution
More negative (ex. hydroxide ($OH^-$) compounds) than negative -> alkaline (basic) solution
Balance of positive and negative -> neutral solution

Measured using the pH scale
pH of 0 -> strong acid (ex. hydrochloric acid)
pH of 7 -> neutral (ex. water)
pH of 14 -> strong base (ex. bleach)

pH 0 - 6 -> acidic
pH 8 - 14 -> alkaline

## Conductivity
[[Measurements#Conductivity]]

## Solubility
[[Measurements#Solubility]]

## Precipitation
#precipitation
when a chemical is added to a solution, causing a reaction that forms a new compound that is not soluable, this new solid material is called a __precipitate__.

## Five (5) Water Systems
__carry-over__ -> the condition when water droplets are carried along with the steam leaving the boiler drum
__scale__ -> a coating resulting from a high concentration of dissolved calcium and magnesium ^5bf170
- can be minimized through _distillation_ or _demineralization_.

### 1. Make-up Water
controls mineral content in water to increases conductivity and minimizes scaling
- Chemical treatment to:
	- remove impurities
	- maintain heat transfer surfaces
- Demineralizer (reduces scaling) to:
	- removes minerals from the water
	- uses ion exchange method to take out impurities and solids
- Electrodialysis Reversal Process (EDR)
	- electrochemical + membrane cell technologies
	
### 2. Condensate & Feedwater
controls corrosion due to dissolved oxygen gas and low pH
- Treat to Control
	- reduce corrosion from dissolved oxygen gas
		- De-aerator	
		- Hydrazine chemical
	- raise pH
		- corrosion lowest in 10-12 pH range
		- ammonia
	- Dissolved solids
		- conductivity
		
### 3. Boiler Water
- Control dissolved material
	- minimize scale
	- minimize [[4. Power Plant Chemistry#^eb9c95|corrosion]]
	- minimize [[4. Power Plant Chemistry#^5bf170|carry-over]]
	- minimize silica (reduces heat exchange in the water)

### 4. Closed Cooling Water
controls corrosion 
- Treated Cooling Water
	
### 5. Circulating Water
controls algae and slime
- Circulating Water
	- Chlorine -> control algae and slime
	
## Study Questions
1. elements; mixtures; compounds
2. elements
3. $H_2O$, 2 hydrogen and 1 oxygen atom
4. atoms
5. ions
6. anions, cations
7. alkaline
8. acidic
9. acids
10. 0; 14; 7
11. alkalinity; acidity
12. measure of electrical resistance
13. parts per million
14. temperature; pressure
15. make-up water; condensate & feedwater; boiler water; closed cooling water; circulating water
16. increases
17. calcium; magnesium
18. low pH; dissolved gasses
19. carry-over
20. damage by a chemical reaction (ex. rust)
21. destruction by flow of a substrance

## Quiz Answers
1. elements
2. H2O
3. 2 atoms of hydrogen
4. 1 atom of oxygen
5. anions
6. cations
7. basic
8. alkaline
9. parts per million
10. increase
11. scale
12. demineralizer
13. dissolved oxygen gas and low pH
14. algae and slime
15. corrosion is damage to a material due to a chemical reaction; erosion is damage to a material due to the flow of a substance