# 8. Heat Exchangers
---

The term ==heat exchanger applies to any piece of equipment designed to transfer heat==. In a power plant, this applies to power plant auxillary equipment where heat is transferred from one fluid to another.

Two main types:
1. feedwater heaters
2. condensers
3. and other types

## Feedwater Heaters (FWHs)
Uses extraction steam from the turbine to pre-heat the water entering the boiler.

Types of FWHs:
1.	Open (or contact) feedwater heaters
	-	steam and feedwater mix in the same space
2.	Closed feedwater heaters
	-	no mixing occurs
	
The effectiveness of either type depends on the net loss to the cycle resulting from transferring heat from the steam to the feedwater.

### Terminal Temperature Difference (TTD)
Measures the effectiveness of a FWH.
[[Condensate & Feedwater#Thermal Temperature Difference TTD]]

## Open (Contact) FWHs
In this FWH, extraction steam and feedwater are discharged at saturation conditions.
At saturation, water cannot hold gases in solution. This effectively deaerates the feedwater.

TTD is 0 but each contact heater must be followed by a pump.

## Closed FWHs
This FWH is a [[Shell and Tube Heater]] where feedwater enters the tube side through the feedwater inlet and the inlet water box and flows to through the tubes to the outlet water box. Extraction steam, taken from the turbine, enters the extraction steam inlet to the shell side and is used to heat the feedwater.

__# passes__ -- number of times the water goes the length of the heater

Features:
-	U-tubes
-	Drain outlet
-	Water box

### High Pressure Feedwater Heater
-> Drains Inlet
-> Steam Inlet
-> Feedwater Inlet
Feedwater Outlet ->
Condensate Outlet ->

This FWH takes extraction steam from the HP section of the turbine, meaning steam will enter it at a superheated temperature.
Some heaters may contain a de-superheating section (occurs before the condenser section) where the steam is cooled to a saturation temperature.

## Countercurrent Flow
Occurs when two mediums are flowing in the opposite direction.

Hottest steam entering is transferring heat to the hottest feedwater leaving. This maintains a minimum TTD between the steam and feedwater at all times.

## Heaters and the Cycle
Heaters are numbered in reverse order in which steam is extracted from the turbine.
-	Extraction Steam #1 to #5, High-to-low
-	Heaters #1 to #5, Low-to-high

### Cascading Drain System
Ideally, drains would be collected and pumped into the condensor/feedwater after leaving the heater. But, this would require a pump after every heater.

In the cascading drain system, drains are sent to the next lower heater. Drains flash to steam due to the lower pressure.

Drain flow increases from #5 to #1 heater
-	#5 -> extraction steam
-	#4 -> extraction steam + drains from #5
-	#3 -> extraction steam + drains from #4
-	#2 -> extraction steam + drains from #3
-	#1 -> extraction steam + drains from #2

A __heater drip pump__ (HDP) is placed at the end of the cascade to pump the water ideally into the boiler feed pump suction.

#### Heater Level Control
Drains to the lower heater are regulated. This is controlled with a __normal level control valve__ (NLCV).

-	Alternate drain disposal route
	-	High level dump goes back to the main condenser
	-	This is for safety and maintenence
	
For example, if maintenence needs to be done on heater #4, the NLCV connecting the #5 drain to #4 is closed. Then, the drain from #5 is sent to the condensor on a different line.

## Condensers
==Two (2) main purposes:==
-	Creates a vacuum or low absolute pressure at turbine exhaust
-	Reclaims and collects high purity condensate for reuse in the cycle

Condensers can serve more functions, but the above two are the most common.

### Main Condenser
A [[Shell and Tube Heater]]:
-	Seawater flows in the tube side
-	Condensing steam on the shell side

The main condenser is ==located below the turbine exhaust==, which minimizes the pressure drop.

It is fitted with expansion joints and spring mounts to allow for the condenser to expand in response to the temperature changes.


#### Circulating Water Side
-	Most are single pass
-	CW enters the inlet waterbox, flows through the tubes to the outlet waterbox, and then overboard.
-	CW side is divided in halves so one side can be isolated while unit is online
	-	cleaning, maintenence, check for tube leaks

#### Steam Side
-	Must be leak tight to prevent loss of vacuum
-	Steam enters from the top of the condenser
-	Tube layout must be such that the steam can quickly and easily come into contact with greatest number of tubes

### Air Removal Zone
-	Air and non-condensable gases are present the condenser

## Plate Heat Exchangers
-	Thin corrugated metal heat transfer plates
-	Frame to compress the plates together
-	Plates are typically stainless steel
	-	can be titanium
-	Pairs of plates form a channel for the fluids to flow
-	Gaskets on the plates for sealing, which prevents mixing of the fluids

Used for liquid-to-liquid heat exchange. This exchange is achieved through ==conduction==.
-	Used in Kahe 3, 4, 5 & 6 chillers
-	Aux Cooling Water and Sea Water

Some can now be used for low pressure and low temperature steam
-	Brazed plates

Advantages:
-	==Compact size==
	-	two plate and frame in the space for one shell and tube
-	==Turbulent flow of fluid==, which increases heat transfer efficiency
-	Can ==adjust heat transfer capacity== by adding or removing plates

Main components:
-	Heat transfer plates
-	Fixed covers
-	Support column
-	Moveable cover
-	Gasket
-	Carrying bar
-	Tightening bolt

## Reboilers
A [[Shell and Tube Heater]].
-	Steam in the tube side
-	Water in the shell side

The steam is used to heat fuel oil for boilers.

## Other Heat Exchangers
-	air ejector condenser
-	chillers -- cools aux cooling water
	-	used to cool lube oil
	-	used to cool large bearings
	-	used to cool boiler doors
-	fuel oil heaters
-	lube oil coolers

## Study Question Answers
1.	transfer heat
2.	true
3.	true
4.	de-aerate
5.	true
6.	true
7.	all of the above
8.	false
9.	true
10.	as the condensate drains down to the next heater, it will flash into saturated steam, which helps to heat the feedwater
11.	false
12.	safety & maintenence; alternate route is routed to the condenser
13.	false
14.	creates an area of low pressure; reclaims pure condensate to reuse in the cycle
15.	true
16.	directly below the turbine exhaust
17.	to allow to close one side while performing maintenence on the other side
18.	with steam and leakage
19.	
20.	conduction
21.	turblent flow; transfer plates
22. size contraints; able to change heat transfer capacity
23. 

## Quiz Answers
1. transfer heat
2. true
3. all of the above
4. to allow to perform maintenence on a single heater without taking the entire system offline; routed to the condenser
5. provides low pressure area
6. reclaims condensate for re-use
7. directly below the turbine exhaust
8. to allow to take one side offline to perform maintenence
9. through steam or leakage
10. compact; adjustable heat transfer capacity
11. -
	1. heat transfer plates
	2. carrying bar
	3. guide bar
	4. fixed cover
	5. support column
	6. moveable cover
	7. gaskets
	8. tightening bolt
12. when the liquids are flowing through the plates in alternating directions, heat is transferred through conduction