# 9. Boilers and Accessories
---

## Boilers

Waiau 3 & 4 -- Babcock & Wilcox three drum radiant type
	- produces 447,000 lb/hr of superheated steam at 875 psig and 905 F
	- 
Waiau 5 & 6 -- Babcock & Wilcox single drum radiant type
	- continually produces 485,000 lb/hr of superheated steam, but is capable of producing 506,000 lb/hr
	- 1315 psig
	- 950 F

Waiau 7 & 8 \ Kahe 1 & 2 -- Combusion Engineering (C-E) Natural Circulation Boiler

## Boiler Accessories

### Safety Valves
Relieves pressure to prevent damage to the boiler by exceeding the maximum allowable working pressure.

They open automatically when the internal pressure exceeds a set point. Once the pressure goes below the reset point, it closes back up. These two points are determined by adjusting the tension on the internal spring.

If the safety valve fails, it may not reset. If enough pressure is lost the unit will trip.

Two types:
- DIN (German-based, used in Europe)
- ASME (used in US)

#### Electromatic Relief Valve (ERV)
Located upstream from relief valve. It is usually set to relieve before the other regular safety valves in order to minimize maintenence of them. Operators either off, automatically or manually.

#### Gagged Safety Valves

### Steam Drum and Internals
-> feedwater
main steam ->
downcomers ->

__cyclone steam separator__ - spins the steam so all the moisture collects on the outside of the scrubber
__scrubber__ - series of metal sheets where steam can easily pass through but water cannot

### Mud Drum / Lower Drum

### Soot Blowers
Remotes soot and ash from boiler tubes.

- Chilling action + velocity -- ash/soot will be removed by a cracking effect



### Boiler Water Treatment and Control

### Boiler Gauge Glasses

### Drum Vent and Superheat Drains

### Boiler Fill and Drain System

### Air Preheaters

### Steam Air Heaters

### Draft Equipment

### Boilers Sealing and Cooling Air

### Hydrostatic Testing