# 9. Pumps
---

__Pumps__ add energy to a liquid to raise its pressure. Converts mechanical energy to kinetic energy.

Types:
-	Positive displacement
-	Jet pumps
-	Centrifugul

## Positive Displacement Pumps
A positive displacement pump moves or displacement a constant positive volume of liquid

Two types:
-	Rotary (circular motion; gears)
-	Reciprocating (back and forth motion; piston)

### Rotary type
-	Internal gear pumps
-	External gear pumps
-	Rotary lobe pumps
-	Sliding vane pumps

The flow of rotary type pumps are steady unlike reciprocating types.

### Reciprocating type

Most effecient for relatively small flow rates and high pressure.
Classified by number of pistons

## Centrifugul
Most popular type of pump due to:
-	simple -- less moving parts compared to positive displacement
-	compact
-	low cost

Centrifugal pumps operate under a variety of conditions
Force moves rotating body away from center of rotation
Amount of force:
-	weight of body (weight of liquid)
-	distance from center of rotation (shaft diameter)
-	speed of rotation


Parts:
-	impeller -- rotating member with vanes
-	volute casing

Classes:
1.	volute type
2.	diffuser type

The impeller is driven by an electric motor, steam turbine, or internal combustion engine.

## Study Question Answers

1.	to add energy to a liquid to raise its pressure
2.	true
3.	back and forth
4.	false
5.	internal gear pumps; rotary lobe pumps; sliding vane pumps
6.	true
7.	centrifugal
8.	false
9.	impeller
10.	true
11.	both of these
12.	