# Lubricating Oil System
Section 22

---

>1. An important function of lubricating oil is to _____ _ a. prevent damage to equipment. b. remove heat. c. both of the above. 2. What are some of the desired properties of turbine lube oil? a. b. C. 3. List two causes of oil deterioration. a. b. 4. Demulsibility is a measure of oil's ability to separate from water. True \ False 5. High performance in oil is attained by adding various chemicals or additives. True \ False 6. When lube oil is subjected to pressure, it increases its viscosity. True \ False 7. The clean oil tank holds clean oil and the used oil tank holds used oil that has been centrifuged and filtered. True \ False Section 22 15 Revised September 2020 lo GENERATION-OAHU DIVISION STUDY QUESTIONS 8. What is a Bowser? 9. Name the compartments in a Bowser and list the function of each. 10. When the oil level in the filtering system rises above the normal operating level, it indicates that the screened trays should be removed and cleaned. True \ False 11. Why is it important that the vapor extractor be in service whenever there is hydrogen in the generator? 12. What is the purpose of the bearing oil coolers? 13. Why is it important that a bearing oil cooler be checked for oil flow before transferring coolers? Section 22 16 Revised September 2020 lo STUDY QUESTIONS GENERATION-OAHU DMSION 14. An agitating action removes impurities which differ in specific gravity from the oil. True \ False 15. List and provide a brief description of the methods used to remove impurities from the turbine lube oil 16. List three (3) alarms associated with the Turbine Lube Oil System 17. List and briefly describe the major components of the Turbine Lube Oil system. Section 22 17 Revised September 2020 lo GENERATION-OAHU DMSION STUDY QUESTIONS 18. Diagram the flow oflube oil. Include and label all major components and indicate flow direction.